Pietro Tenerani (11 November 1789 – 16 December 1869) was an Italian sculptor of the Neoclassic style.

Biography
He was born in Torano, near Carrara. He initially trained with his maternal uncle, the sculptor Pietro Marchetti, and in 1813, obtained a stipend to study in Rome. There he studied mainly in the studio of Bertel Thorvaldsen. In 1816, he sculpted an Abandoned Psyche sold to Marchesa Lenzoni of Florence.
He was prolific and worked in a chaste neoclassical style into the mid-nineteenth century, specialising in pious subjects. His most prominent commission was for the tomb of Pope Pius VIII in Rome. He completed a colossal statue of St Alfonso de Liguori for the Vatican. He sculpted a St John the Evangelist for the church of San Francesco di Paola in Naples, and of San Benedetto in the Basilica Ostiense. He made numerous busts of officials in the state and church, including Popes Pius VIII, Gregory XVI, and Pius IX.
He depicted the Count Esterhazy and his daughter Karoly. He completed a bas-relief for the Monument to Alberto Mattioli, designed by Luigi Poletti, for the church of Sant'Agostino in Rimini. He sculpted a bust of Pellegrino Rossi, the ill-fated minister of Pius IX, and of Carlota of Mexico, former empress, and widow of Maximilian. He sculpted a public statue of Simon Bolivar for Plaza de Bolivar in Bogota, and a bronze statue of Ferdinand II of Naples for the city of Messina in Sicily. In Hungary, he sculpted a monument to Foth for the Karoly chapel. He completed restorations on the Lateran Sophocles statue under Pope Gregory XVI.

Among his pupils were Saro Zagari, Fedele Caggiano and Ambrogio Zuffi. His son Carlo became an architect. He was buried in the Church of Santa Maria degli Angeli alle Terme Diocleziane.

References
Further reading
Iconographic encyclopaedia of the arts and sciences, Volume 3 By Johann Georg Heck, Philadelphia, 1885, page 153.
Stefano Grandesso, Pietro Tenerani (1789-1869), Silvana Editoriale, Cinisello Balsamo, 2003, ISBN 978-88-8215-678-7 (Google Books)

External links
 Media related to Pietro Tenerani at Wikimedia Commons