Shen Jingdong (Chinese: 沈敬东; pinyin: Shěn Jìngdōng, born 1965) is a contemporary Chinese artist known for his paintings and sculptures of Chinese iconography. He currently lives in Beijing.

Life and career
Shen Jingdong was born in 1965 in Nanjing (province of Jiangsu), China. Shen graduated from the Nanjing Xiaozhuang Normal School in 1984 and the Nanjing Arts Institute in 1991.
After studying Fine art, Shen was conscripted to the Military Drama Troupe of Nanjing Military Area, where he worked for 16 years until 2007.
In the 2000s, the emergence of Shen JingDong in a period of revival for Chinese Contemporary Art suggested a dawning of a new era. Previously, ideological criticism determined the direction of new contemporary art. Shen JingDong provides a definitive example of commercialized aesthetics in Chinese pop art. He attempted various conceptual and performing arts in the 1990s, influenced by Dadaism and pop art.
In 2006, ‘Hero No.12‘ was collected in the National Art Museum of China. 
Since 2007, his works have been exhibited in Hong Kong, Italy, the Republic of Korea, Japan, France, New York and other areas of the United States.
In 2008, his Chinese and international artistic career evolved quickly; Shen become an important contemporary artist of the new wave with his Hero series.  He created into different kinds of people the image of the soldier and of the icons of Chinese life as represented in new forms, sometimes diverted in expressive colors (Blue, Green, Red or Yellow).
In this work, he reveals his innermost thoughts, hidden in metaphors, humor and smiles. Amid the urbanisation and globalization occurring throughout China, Shen JingDong can be seen in his works as a witness to the changes that globalisation brings. Amid the strengthening of ideology and oppression of freedom that coincides with globalisation, his work provides a new way out. Through the harmony of the realm of both imagination and reality, he builds his own fairy tales.

His painting The Bugle realized in 2012 illustrates perfectly his work, allowing each observer to have a new look on the contemporary art, but also a reflection and interpretation intellectual, sensitive and emotional.
The artworks of Shen can be seen in private and public collections worldwide. One of the most famous collectors of Shen's works is actress Zhang Ziyi.
The artist’s market success was displayed already on his home soil in 2013 when his painting Three Great Men, sold at Beijing Googut & Auction for £154,000  – Shen’s auction record price to date. Furthermore, at the international auction house Sotheby’s in 2018 his painting Strength sold for over £79,000 after generating competitive bidding from an eclectic range of clients.

Exhibitions
Selected exhibitions
Exhibitions include:
2021

Blooming flowers and full moon, Beiqiu Art Museum, Nanjing
Best Role, Solo Exhibition, Diyuan Art Museum, Jiaxing
2020

Shen Jingdong : The Beautiful Fairy Tales, Asia House, London, UK 
Small eyes-big world, XSPACE Gallery, Nanjing, China
2019

Art.Design and Home, Red Star Macalline, Guiyang, China
Shen Jingdong came here, Hôtel de l'industrie, Paris, France
Shen Jingdong is here, Chinese gallery, New York, USA
Shen Jingdong was here, Il Giardino Bianco Art Space, Venice, Italy
2018

From South to North in 2018—Shen Jingdong's Invitational Exhibition of Individual Works, Art Museum of School of Fine Arts and Design of Shenyang Normal University, China
Start from Nanjing, Jinling Art Museum, Nanjing, China.
Guns N’Roses—Shen Jingdong’s Solo Exhibition, Parkview Green ART, Beijing, China
2017

International Joke: Shen Jingdong, Ross Art Museum, Maryland, USA
Art Career Record of Good Soldier Jingdong: Shen Jingdong Literature Exhibition, Songzhuang Contemporary Art Documentary Exhibition, Beijing China
Shen Jingdong Story:Shenjingdong, Art and Design Academy Art Museum, Yanshan University, Qinhuangdao, China
2016

International Joke: Shen Jingdong Solo Exhibition, Korean Craft Museum, Cheongju, Republic of Korea
Shen Jingdong +Jon Tsoi:No head No heart, WhiteBox, New York City, USA
Let’s Paint Together: Shen Jingdong and Liao Mingming Collaborative Exhibition, Yue Museum of Art, Beijing, China
New Representational Art in China, Hudson Center for Contemporary Arts, Poughkeepsie, USA
2015

The Little Prince, E Space, Hong Kong
Dawn of a New Age: Ink Redefined, Art Futures Gallery, Hong Kong
Censure, Galerie Dock Sud, Sète, France
2014

My Kingdom of Fairytales, Art Futures Group, ArtOne, Hong Kong
Hidden Meanings, Colour Explosion, Today Art Museum, Beijing, China
Art Paris - Art Fair, "France-Chine 50" (la Chine à l'honneur), France 

2013

Art Basel - Miami Beach, Exhibition Miami FL, États-Unis 
Art Basel - Hong Kong, Exhibition China 
New Art Fair, Espace Pierre Cardin, Paris, France 

2012

ST-ART, Foire Internationale d'art contemporain, Strasbourg, France 

2011

Continue with Revolution, 3V Gallery, Nanjing, China
East/west: Visually Speaking, Frost Art Museum, Miami, FL, United States

2010

Chasing Flames - Chinese Group Show - Zadok Art Gallery, Miami, FL
Lille Art Fair, Foire internationale d'art contemporain, Lille, France 
State of the Dao: Chinese Contemporary Art - Lehman College Art Gallery, New York City, NY
“RESHAPING HISTORY Chinart from 2000 to 2009″ China National Convention Center Beijing, China

2009

Hero, Volta Art Fair, New York, USA, (solo)
Tension at Poles – Invitational Exhibition of Works of Masters from Beijing, Shanghai and Chengdu, Luodai Town, Chengdu, China
Trust – Exhibition of Contemporary Painting, Star Factory Art Center, Beijing, China
Context – Invitational Exhibition of Contemporary Painting, Beijing Foundery Museum of Art, China
Memory of China – Exchange Exhibition of Chinese and Spanish Artists’ Works, Time Space in 798 Factory, Beijing, China
Strength of Practice, the Third Documenta of Contemporary Chinese Prints, Nanjing Museum, China
Red Memory, Liu Haisu Art Museum, Shanghai, China
China-Korean Exchange Exposition, 798 Yan Gallery, Beijing, China
Invitational Exhibition of Experimental Contemporary Arts, Museum of Contemporary Art, Songzhuang, Beijing, China
Chengdu Biennale, New International Convention & Exposition Center, Chengdu, China
Visual Presentation of Identity, Shanghai Duolun Museum of Modern Art, Shanghai, China

2008

Heroes - ChinaSquare, New York (solo)
The Most Beloved People, Today Art Museum & New Millennium Gallery, Beijing, China (solo)
Multiple Perspectives – Exhibition of 11 Chinese Contemporary Artists’ Works, Beijing You Gallery, Beijing, China
Assembling under the Five Rings, Legend Hotel, Beijing, China
Up North – Exhibition of Jiangsu Artists’ Works, Egret Art Center, Beijing, China
Up North, Down South, Art for All Society, Beijing, China
Post-Modern Expression of Red Classics, Dong. Coffee. Event in 798 Art Zone, Beijing, China
Strength of Practice – the Second Documenta of Contemporary Chinese Prints, Nanjing Museum, China
Drifting – China – Korean Exchange Exposition, Top Gallery, 798 Art Zone, Beijing, China

2007

Making Heroes for ten years, Beijing Imagine Gallery, China (solo)
We Could Be Heroes – Shen Jingdong solo exhibition, Hong Kong Yan Gallery (solo)
Progressive Action, Beijing Millennium Time Gallery, China
Body ? Impression – The Human Body in Contemporary Chinese Art, Red Gate Gallery, 798 Art Zone, Beijing, China
Revolution, China Square Gallery, New York, USA
Tie – Path, You Gallery, Beijing, China
The Fourth China International Art Gallery expo, Beijing National Trade Center, China
2006

Images of Heroes, New Millennium Gallery, Beijing, China
Exhibition of One Painting, 88 Art Document Storehouse, Beijing, China

Public collections
The following public collections include Shen's work:

2019 – Hello, Van Gogh, acrylic on canvas, 80 × 60 cm. French Industrial Palace, Paris, France
2018 – The Little Prince, oil on canvas, 100x100cm. Jinling Art Museum, China
2014 – Salute, Stainless Steel, 200 cm high. Bengbu University, China
2013 – Salute, Stainless steel, 200 cm high. Xiamen Jimei University, China
2013 – Soldier with a Gun, Cast bronze, 200 cm high. Xiamen Jimei University, China
2012 – Salute, Cast bronze, 170 cm tall. Nanjing Art Institute, China
2009 – Hero, oil on canvas, 100 cm × 100 cm. WURTH Art Museum, Spain
2008 – Harmony One, oil on canvas, 200 cm × 600 cm. Oberte Museum, Germany
2008 – Head of a Soldier, spray paint in glass-steel, 56 cm × 52 cm × 35 cm, Henan Art Museum, China
2007 – Heroes Series No.12, oil on canvas, 200 cm × 200 cm, National Art Museum of China, China
2007 – Heroes Series No.42, oil on canvas, 200 cm × 200 cm, Singapore Museum of Fine Arts, Singapore
2006 – Founding Ceremony, oil on canvas, 200 cm × 700 cm. Shanghai Art Museum No. 1, China

See also
Zhang Ziyi
Yue Minjun
Zhang Xiaogang

References
External links
Shen Jingdong’s website
Connect with Shen Jingdong
Shen Jingdong - Artnet
Coral Contemporary - Shen Jingdong’s gallery
Yang Gallery - Beijing & Singapore
China Square Gallery - New York
Dock Sud Gallery - France