Jose Emilio Fuentes Fonseca (JEFF) is an artist who was born in Cuba in 1974. He came to live in Havana at 7 years old, where he still lives and works today. He is frequently referred to as a "Naïve" or "Outsider" artist, since he principally works on themes such as childhood and childishness with a visible passion for toys and children’s art.

Life and career
JEFF’s work has been influenced by his own experience, as he was brought up by his grandparents, and spent his childhood separated from his parents in Oriente Province. When he was 9 years old, his brother found a stick of dynamite and brought it home, JEFF’s curiosity made him lose 3 fingers. From that moment, his work has always aimed at denouncing this world of omnipresent danger. He manipulates the children’s language to create a surprising impression of simplicity. Sailboats made of jagged, rusty metal, or wooden trains transporting severed limbs are some of the toys he created.
JEFF began studying art at age 13. When he was age 21, got a grant from the Ludwig Foundation of Cuba (LFC) to produce his Landscape at 21 installations. In 1994, his first solo exhibition at Havana’s Museo Municipal de Alquízar Álvaro Reinoso Valdez with El Rostro Innocente (in English: The Innocent Face) he received his first recognition as a significant artist. El Rostro Innocente installation featured a classroom full of broken chairs in which on the back of each chair was a pair of lead wings and paintings of fetuses with congenital birth defects covered the classroom walls.
JEFF was a guest artist of the Havana Biennial from March 27 to April 30, 2009. He created a herd of 12 metal elephants, which he moved from place to place throughout the city during the night.

Awards and recognition
Collective exhibitions
Solo exhibitions
References
Centro de Desarrollo de las Artes Visuales (Cuba) (2005). IV Salón de Arte Cubano Contemporáneo. Centro de Desarrollo de las Artes Visuales. LCCN 2005465181.

External links
"New Installations, Artists in Residence: Cuba JEFF (José Emilio Fuentes Fonseca)". mattress.org. Mattress Factory. October 2004. Archived from the original on 2011-01-04.