Mohammed Hanif (born November 1964) is a British Pakistani writer and journalist who writes a monthly opinion piece in The New York Times.
Hanif is the author of the critically acclaimed book A Case of Exploding Mangoes, which was longlisted for the Man Booker Prize, shortlisted for the Guardian First Book Award, and won the Commonwealth Prize for Best Book. His second book, Our Lady of Alice Bhatti, won the Wellcome Book Prize. He also worked as a correspondent for the BBC News based in Karachi and was the writer of an acclaimed feature film about the city, The Long Night. His work has been published by The New York Times, The Daily Telegraph, The New Yorker and The Washington Post. His play The Dictator's Wife has been staged at the Hampstead Theatre.

Life
He was born in Okara, Punjab. He graduated from Pakistan Air Force Academy as a pilot officer, but subsequently left to pursue a career in journalism. He initially worked for Newsline and wrote for The Washington Post and India Today. 
He is a graduate of the University of East Anglia. 
In 1996, he moved to London to work for the BBC. Later, he became the head of the BBC's Urdu service in London. He moved back to Pakistan in 2008.

Works
His first novel A Case of Exploding Mangoes (2008) was shortlisted for the 2008 Guardian First Book Award and longlisted for the 2008 Man Booker Prize. It won the 2009 Commonwealth Book Prize in the Best First Book category and the 2008 Shakti Bhatt First Book Prize.
Hanif has also written for the stage and screen, including a feature film, The Long Night (2002), a BBC radio play, What Now, Now That We Are Dead?, and the stage play The Dictator's Wife (2008). His second novel, Our Lady of Alice Bhatti, was published in 2011. It was shortlisted for the Wellcome Trust Book Prize (2012), and the DSC Prize for South Asian Literature (2013).
He is currently collaborating with composer Mohammed Fairouz on an opera titled Bhutto.
In 2018, he wrote a novel called Red Birds.
Hanif's style has often been compared with that of author Salman Rushdie, although Hanif himself disagrees with this assessment. Even though he says that he enjoys reading Rushdie's books, he would not want to suffer the same fate as Rushdie did.

Award Return
In opposition to Pakistan's ongoing persecution of the Baloch people and police crackdown during a protest march in Islamabad on December 20, 2023, Mohammed Hanif has returned his "Sitara-e-Imtiaz" award.

Bibliography
Films
The Long Night (Script) (2002)

Novels
A Case of Exploding Mangoes (2008)
Our Lady of Alice Bhatti (2011)
The Baloch who is not missing and others who are (2013)
Red Birds (2018)

Plays
What Now, Now That We Are Dead? (radio play)
The Dictator's Wife (2008)

Personal life
Hanif is married to the actress Nimra Bucha.

References
External links

Man Booker Prize Interview
An interview with M. Hanif on "Our Lady of Alice Bhatti"
Mohammed Hanif on X
Mohammed Hanif: My Country, Caving to the Taliban
Ten Myths About Pakistan- Times of India
Audio slideshow interview with Mohammed Hanif talking about A Case of Exploding Mangoes on The Interview Online
Audio: Mohammed Hanif in conversation on the BBC World Service discussion programme The Forum
"Mohammed Hanif on being longlisted for the Man Booker", manbookerprise.com
Interview with Mohammed Hanif: "People Did Not Want the Taliban"
Mohammad Hanif Articles on BBC Urdu
Interview with Papercuts literary magazine on writing technique, elitism in Pakistani writing in English and hypocrisy in Pakistani society