Jenaro Pindú (1946–1993) was a prominent cartoonist, sculptor and architect of Paraguay. He was a student of Hermann Guggiari, one of the best-known Paraguayan sculptors of the twentieth century.

Trajectory
His long career in the Paraguayan art world stretched from 1966 until 1983. 

Ticio Escobar, the most important art critic in Paraguay, wrote about Pindú in 1983: "Today is already almost a truism to say that the 70's began with a predominance of drawing and the exhibition in the Gallery Pindú Miro may serve as the parameter and the beginning of that heyday… "
Livio Abramo, a master engraver, said: "... Pindú is one of the most capable artists of Paraguay-current, lyrical and dramatic at the same time-creating architectural structures laden with symbolism and transforming the human sense of latent, tight aggressiveness that comes from your subconscious in a world where his art, already solidly mature, provides us with an unexpected surprise and lyrical visions."

Distinctions
He received, among other major awards, the following: "Honorable Mention" in the Visual Arts Competition ACFA (1966), "Second Prize" in the Story Contest organized by the newspaper La Tribuna (1973); "Award for Guest Honor" at the Second Biennial Maldonado (Uruguay) (1977) and" Grand Prix" at the Third Biennial Maldonado (1979)

Works
He was a prolific artist, and his collection of ink drawings and engravings is huge. Most of these samples of his talent have no title and are in major museums Paraguay and the world and in private collections.
As an architect he designed both homes and commercial buildings that are both intrinsically works of art while retaining a distinct style and daring.

References
Cultural Center of the Republic El Cabildo
Biographical Dictionary "FORGERS OF PARAGUAY," First Edicción January 2000. Distributed editions of Quevedo. Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Enciclopedia Virtual Paraguaya - Portal

External links
[[[Category:All articles with dead external links]] the Circle Gallery]
The Homes of Pindu on YouTube