Fred Hechinger (;  born 1998 or 1999) is an American actor. He began his career with supporting roles in such films as the coming-of-age film Eighth Grade (2018), the period drama News of the World (2020), and the psychological thriller The Woman in the Window (2021). Also in 2021, he starred in the Netflix horror The Fear Street Trilogy (2021) and the first season of the HBO anthology series The White Lotus (2021). He has since portrayed Seth Warshavsky in the miniseries Pam & Tommy (2022).

Early life
Hechinger was born in New York City to parents Sarah Rozen and Paul Hechinger. His grandfather was The New York Times education editor Fred M. Hechinger. He grew up on the Upper West Side and attended Saint Ann's School, where his classmates included fellow actors Lucas Hedges and Maya Hawke. Hechinger was a teen reporter and studied at Upright Citizens Brigade. He is Jewish.

Career
In 2018, Hechinger made his acting debut as Trevor in the coming-of-age dramedy film Eighth Grade. The following year, he co-starred in Marc Meyers' drama film Human Capital, which is based on Stephen Amidon's 2004 novel of the same name. It premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival and later released through DirecTV Cinema on March 20, 2020.
In 2020, Hechinger starred in Paul Greengrass' Western film, News of the World, alongside Tom Hanks.
In 2021, he starred alongside Amy Adams in the Joe Wright-directed psychological thriller film The Woman in the Window; the movie had already been filmed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
He appeared as Simon Kalivoda in the Netflix horror films The Fear Street Trilogy, which were released in 2021. Hechinger's breakout role came in his performance as Quinn Mossbacher in the first season of HBO's The White Lotus, which was released in the same year.
Hechinger will next appear in the upcoming Sony's Spider-Man Universe film Kraven the Hunter, with Aaron Taylor-Johnson in the title role, scheduled to be released on August 30, 2024, in which he is due to portray Dmitri Smerdyakov / Chameleon.

Filmography
Film
Television
Music videos
Awards and nominations
References
External links
Fred Hechinger at IMDb